There is going to be a focus on the military
fighting throughout this series, starting
next episode, but it’s worth explaining
the context of the Baltic States in World
War Two, so that we have a clear idea of the
area the Axis and Soviets are fighting over,
and understand what motivated some of the
Baltic units that were fighting on either
side.
Many of the books in English (some translated
from German) like to emphasise the Soviet
atrocities that took place during the fighting,
and don’t mention the German atrocities,
even though there were many. They also don’t
explain the context of the Baltic States in
this period very well, giving an impression
that everyone was pro-German. Ultimately,
they’re trying to justify the Wehrmacht
and National Socialism and whitewash them
of their crimes. Many of the books were written
during the Cold War, some by Germans, and
they’re playing on the anti-Marxist mentality
that the west has. So let’s try and strike
a balance in the narrative between the two
ideologies.
Now it is natural for human beings to favour
one side or another - team A vs team B - but
as you watch this series, remember this isn’t
a football game. We shouldn’t cheer either
side on the Axis-Soviet Front. Keeping the
fate of the Baltic States in the back of your
mind, as but one example of the horrors therein,
will ensure that you view the Axis and Soviets
with equal disgust.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania share a similar,
tragic story. Essentially, they were all dominated
by foreign powers for around 700 hundred years.
Then on the 16th of February 1918, Lithuania
became independent from Germany - although
wouldn’t be freed from German rule until
the November time. On the 18th of November
1918, Latvia declared her independence from
Russia. And Estonia did the same on the 24th.
Latvia and Estonia won the following wars
of independence and became democratic republics,
along with Lithuania.
Skipping forward to 1939, all three states
had lost their democratic status, and were
replaced by dictatorships, mainly due to the
economic or political crises of the interwar
period. In all three cases, anti-Bolshevik
and anti-Soviet sentiments led directly or
indirectly to those dictatorships.
Then at 0200 hours on the 24th of August 1939,
barely twenty years after their independence,
the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact was signed. This
carved up the Baltic nations between National
Socialist Germany to the west, and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics (the USSR, or
Soviet Union) to the east. In order to protect
Leningrad from potential threats, the pact
secretly assigned the Baltic states to the
Soviet sphere of influence.
“In the event of a territorial and political
rearrangement of the regions making up the
Baltic States (Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania)
the northern frontier of Lithuania will simultaneously
serve as the frontier of the spheres of interest
of Germany and the USSR. In this, Lithuania’s
interest in connection with the Vilnius District
is recognised by both parties.”
Hitler invades Poland on the 1st of September
1939, and Stalin does the same on the 17th.
But the Western Allies only declare war on
Germany, not the Soviet Union. This gives
the Soviets a free hand on their secret claims.
Hitler had also called for all Volksdeutsche
- the German people outside of Germany - to
come “Heims ins Reich” (Home to the Reich).
60,000 Volksdeutsche in the Baltic States
did move to Germany during this period, as
did some Jews, who apparently feared the Soviet
Union more than the National Socialists.
On the 18th of September 1939, a Polish submarine
called the Orsel, which had docked in Estonia,
now decided to flee to Britain. Stalin used
this as proof that the Estonians were not
neutral, and gathered 160,000 troops on the
Estonian border. On the 28th of September
1939, Estonia had no choice but to sign an
agreement allowing 25,000 Soviet troops into
their territory. This was bad, since the entire
Estonian army was just 16,000 men strong at
this time.
Then on the 4th of October 1939 Latvia met
a similar fate, as Moscow forced Latvian politicians
to accept 30,000 Soviet troops into their
country. The Lithuanians were forced to give
Memel to the Germans, and found the rest of
their country occupied by Soviet troops as
well. Fearing total annexation by the Soviets,
the Lithuanian president, Antanas Smetona,
actually offered his country as a protectorate
to the Germans. But it was no use.
Soviet troops in the Baltic countries were
ordered to keep a low profile at first. But
by the summer of 1940, the situation had changed.
On the 14th of June, Molotov demands the dissolution
of the Lithuanian government in order to set
up a pro-Soviet government in its place. The
Lithuanians bowed to Soviet pressure on the
15th. Similar ultimatums to Estonia and Latvia
were delivered on the 16th. They all considered
resistance, but without outside support, they
knew they’d stand little chance. On the
17th of June 1940, as the west was distracted
by the Fall of France, the first Soviet troops
occupied Latvia and Estonia and took control
of everything - the government and the economy.
Social ownership and control of the means
of production had arrived in the Baltics.
And in order to make it seem that this was
a legitimate act - as though the Baltic peoples
wanted this to happen - the Soviets called
elections in the three Baltic States. Voter
turnout was remarkable - with one precinct
in Lithuania achieving 122 percent of voter
turnout. Obviously it was all totally above
board. So enthusiastic were the people to
have everything they owned taken off them
and their countries dissolved, that the results
of the elections were announced in Moscow
before the vote had even finished. Once the
“people’s parliaments” were elected,
they voted themselves out of existence. The
three Baltic states were now assimilated into
the Soviet Union, each becoming Soviet Borg
republics.
For some reason, the Baltic people weren’t
happy. Some even took to the forests to fight
against the Soviets. Others sung patriotic
songs in defiance. But resistance is futile.
Patriotic songs would do little when your
property is seized, and you’re killed or
deported to the Gulag slave labour camps in
the east. This is what happened to the Baltic
peoples over the next 12 months - a period
known in Latvia as ‘The Year of Terror’.
“Civilians branded ‘bourgeois nationalists’
or opposed to the Soviet takeover were deported
to the USSR, with 15,000 people sent to Siberia
on the night of 13-14 June 1941 in wooden
cattle wagons. The majority would not return.”
People were arbitrarily separated into social
groups - those deemed to be the owner class,
or anyone who might be a threat to the Marxist-Socialist-state, were to be either killed or enslaved. 60,000
Estonians, 35,000 Latvians, and 34,000 Lithuanians
would ‘disappear’ and the majority would
die on the journey to, or in, the Gulag. It
was the same in Poland, where 1.5 million
Poles would be enslaved and sent east. The
infants, the sick, and the elderly were hit
the hardest by poor conditions, poor rations,
cold and disease. More round-ups were planned
in the future. Fear gripped the entire Eastern
population. The police were disbanded and
replaced with communist militias. Individuals
were banned from owning anything and businesses
were seized to be controlled by central administrations.
Youth and student organizations were dissolved,
and new state-run organizations took their
place. Books were burned. The culture and
life of the Baltic peoples was suppressed.
The workers did receive large pay rises, but
since production didn’t increase, this only
led to massive inflation. And now that trade
wasn’t allowed with the west, and there
wasn’t any incentive to work (which hurt
production levels further), there were fewer
goods in the shops, leading to fewer things
to buy. Money is worthless if you can’t
buy anything with it. So, despite wage increases,
the Baltic peoples soon became worse off than
they were before the occupation.
Ironically, while a higher percentage of Jews
in the Baltics were deported than the rest
of the population, the Jews were seen as non-national
- international - and thus pro-Soviet (since
Marxist Socialism is international-socialism)
and thus were blamed for the situation that
the rest of the Baltic peoples were now in. Some Jewish workers did take jobs in the Soviet-imposed
administration. But, while they were the minority
in that administration, the number of Jews
in the administration formed a larger proportion
than the Latvian or Lithuanian populations.
So there was resentment from the rest of the
Baltic peoples as it appeared to them that
the Jews were being favoured more than them
by the socialist government. Latvians and
Lithuanians who had also joined the Soviet
administration wanted to distance themselves
from their collaboration, and so they blamed
the Jews to divert attention from their own
failings. As a result, anti-Semitism actually
increased in Lithuania and Latvia because
of the Soviet occupation, which explains why
Lithuanians and Latvians initially assisted
the National Socialists when they launched
Operation Barbarossa on the 22nd of June 1941.
Crushing all opposition, the Germans reached
Latvian territory by the end of the first
day. By July 1941 the Germans had taken Riga.
Lithuanians and Latvians celebrated the arrival
of the Germans as liberators. But, not all
of them. Instead of showering their liberators
with flowers, the Jewish communities locked
themselves into their homes and drew their
curtains.
When German troops marched into the Lithuanian
capital, Kaunas, a Lithuanian Provisional
Government had already taken control in the
vacuum of the Soviet collapse. They were now
trying to recreate an administration, and
were looking forward to Lithuanian independence.
But the National Socialists would have none
of that. As Hitler makes clear in Mein Kampf
and in his second book - they wanted territory,
resources, and slaves for their People’s
State, not free independent states. The Germans
effectively blocked this Provisional Government
from implementing policies, and disbanded
them after six weeks. Instead, the National
Socialists established ‘General District
Lithuania’ and ruled over the country with
an iron fist.
Similar events happened in Latvia and Estonia.
The National Socialists were not interested
in allowing any concept of nationalism to
form in the Baltic states. Self-government
was not even on the cards, despite many Lithuanians,
Latvians and Estonians hoping it would be.
Einsatzgruppe A and various security units
(including security divisions 207 and 281,
who we will be seeing later) accompanied the
forward German Army units into the capital
cities. They set up volunteer detachments
of local Estonians, Latvians, and Lithuanians
to round up and deal with the Jews.
And so the killings began. Stahlecker’s
Einsatzgruppe A shot at least 200 civilians
in cold blood in Garsden, Lithuania, although
the number may be as high as 800. Their crime
was being a Jew. German police encouraged
Lithuanians to take up arms against their
Jewish neighbours. Yes, neighbours were now
arbitrarily separated into different social
groups again, this time on racial grounds
rather than class. In the capital, Kaunas,
1,500 Jews were murdered and synagogues were
burned in an orgy of violence on the 25th
to 26th of June 1941. On the 4th of July,
Einsatzgruppe A shot another 500 Jews in Kaunas
as well. And another 2,514 on the 6th of July.
One source states that Einsatzgruppe A alone
ran up a total of 138,000 Jews killed by February
of 1942.
Ghettos were set up in places like Kaunas
and Riga. The town of Jelgava was an important
railway hub which we’ll see throughout this
series. It was also where Einsatzgruppe A
murdered 1,550 Jews. In Riga, 400 Jews were
killed as well. And the port of Liepāja
also saw more shootings on the 29th of June
and the 3rd of July. The number of murders
just keeps going up.
In 1942, Salaspils Concentration Camp was
set up southeast of Riga. Malnutrition, illness
and death in the camp cost the lives of 250-650
children. There was also a total of 2,000
dead out of 21,000 prisoners between May of
1942 and September of 1944. 1,000 of these
deaths were Jewish. 4,000 were then transferred
to Poland and Germany where many were killed.
I should point out that the Soviets later
exaggerated the deaths to 100,000 and told
of medical experiments on children, which
were untrue, however there was great suffering
and death in the camp.
So yes, in time, the initial joy of being
freed from Soviet occupation disappeared in
Latvia. The Nazis pulled down Latvian flags,
outlawed the national anthem, disbanded their
attempt at self-governance, and murdered Jews.
15,900 Latvians alone were then sent to Germany
as forced labourers. It was a new reign of
terror similar to that which the Soviets wrought
upon their county.
Now, by the time 1944 rolls around, it looked
as though the Germans would be pushed back,
and the Soviets would conquer the states once
more. This problem divided society. Some welcomed
the Soviets back, while others were afraid
of Soviet rule. Most hated both, but it was
like trying to decide the lesser of two evils.
With the hope that Hitler may still grant
them independence - even though they had never
been promised it - some fought with the Estonian
and Latvian Legions; Waffen SS divisions made
up of Estonians and Latvians. Others, including
Lithuanians, joined police and auxiliary forces.
When the Soviets rolled back into the Baltics,
many were then forcefully recruited into the
Red Army. During the course of this series,
we will see how Latvians fought Latvians at
Courland.
It’s worth noting that animosity exists
because some fought for the Germans and others
fought for the Soviets. As Hunt points out
in the book “Blood in the Forest”, Russians
and Germans still to this day think that if
you point out that the Latvian Legionaries
were just fighting for an independent Latvia,
they’ll accuse you of “glorifying Nazis”.
Clearly emotions still run wild. So who is
right and who is wrong here? Well what’s
interesting is that it is often said that
they were volunteers - willing to fight for
the Germans. But is that really the case?
“Legally, these were deemed volunteer units,
but in fact the Germans used the conscription
laws of the defunct Latvian Republic as a
pretext to compel young men to choose either
labor or military service.”
I guess we’re glorifying National Socialists
and Marxist-Socialists by saying the Baltic
States were caught between two evil regimes
and were forced to fight for one state or
the other. No. While it is very much up for
debate, it appears as though these soldiers
fought in hope of freeing their own countries
- and this was recognized at the time by the
Western Allies at least. All they wanted was
independence - a notion which had been crushed
by both totalitarian ideologies. Unfortunately,
they weren’t going to get it from either
side. But they didn’t know this at the time.
It’s also worth noting that, with the exception
of the Arājs Battalion, the rest of the Latvian
SS didn’t kill Jews. Does that mean we’re
glorifying Nazis by stating this? As Hunt
makes clear, no, not in the slightest. Socialists
may see the world in groups and find people
guilty by association - because they were
the same class, or gender, or race - but the
reality is that people are individuals. Individuals
should not be found guilty just because someone
else was found guilty - because they were
part of the same social group - that makes
no sense. This would be like saying “all
Jews are bad”, or “all bourgeoisie are
bad”, or “all men are bad”, which would
be incorrect. So judging everyone who fought
for the National Socialists or the Marxist
Socialists, and calling them all evil, would
be wrong. Only those that actually committed
or encouraged the crimes are guilty. This
might be an uncomfortable truth for some,
but the evidence - and reality - is clear.
The Baltic States were caught between two
evil regimes, two evil ideologies, two evil
empires. This wasn’t their war, but they
were forced to fight within it. This is the
tragedy of the Baltic States.
In the next episode, we’ll get into the
fighting itself, looking at the period between
the Soviet summer offensives and the end of
August 1944. This will show the events prior
to Army Group North falling back into the
Courland Pocket. We’ll be looking at the
Soviet advance to the Gulf of Riga, which
traps Army Group North in Estonia and northern
Latvia. And Operation Doppelkopf - the German
panzer counter-attack designed to free Army
Group North from that trap. Operation Doppelkopf
is a very interesting battle in itself, especially
for the year 1944, since it used 5 panzer
divisions, one panzergrenadier division, and
more panzer and Sturmgeschutz units as well.
That’s a huge force of armour and motorized
units all in one operation, which somehow
didn’t guarantee success. Yes, the elite
divisions of the German Army were massed together,
but the Red Army is ready for them. The National
Socialists are on the run. Can they weather
the Soviet summer storm? Thank you to my Patrons
for supporting me - you’ve made this series
possible. And thank you all for watching,
by for now.